[MIP] zkApps MIP (#10)
MinaProtocol/MIPs: MIPS/mip-zkapps.md

  **Programmable privacy** - the privacy of both inputs to smart contracts and
  their state can be programmed by their developers

  **Constant in verification time** - individual transactions are executed, or
  more accurately “proven” asynchronously off-chain and verified on chain in
  time proportional to the account updates, independent of computational
  complexity of any individual proof inside of each account update

This MIP represents the first iteration of such a protocol.

## Specification

The following description summarizes the planned changes to the protocol. Not
all technical details are described here.

### Ledger account changes

Recall that accounts are identified by a public key and token id pair.

To accommodate zkApps, Mina ledger accounts have the following new field:

- `token_symbol`: a string, up to six characters long, that can provide a name
     for a `token_id` whose owner is the public key and token id in this
     account. In the existing mainnet, only the default MINA `token_id` is
     currently used. New `token_id`s are derived from the the addresses of the
     smart contract that defines them.

The following account field is removed:

> - `token_permissions`: this field was meant for non-default tokens, which were

Reviewer: should the phrasing be changed here? we are introducing new tokens right? Just in a different way than before I guess?

never introduced

The `snapp` field in accounts, which was never instantiated, is
replaced by the `zkapp` field, which is optional.

The `zkapp` field is a record with the following fields:

- `app_state` : an array of eight field elements, the current state of a zkApp
associated with the account
- `verification_key` : an optional key to be used when verifying transaction
SNARKs for zkApps using this account; when it is missing, the account is a
typical Mina account that supports payments.
- `zkapp_version` : a nonnegative integer, the zkApps version that determined
the `app_state`
- `action_state` : an array of five field elements, each representing an
"action" (see below) contained in a zkApp
- `last_action_slot` : the global slot when the `action_state` was last updated
- `proved_state` : a boolean, whether the application state has been set from a
proof-driven zkapp transaction.

> - `zkapp_uri` : a string, of max size=255, either empty, or denoting a URI that

Reviewer: Is this 255 fields? Is it too late, to consider just adding this on to appState? Then developers can decide if they want to use it for a zkapp_uri or to just have more data for their zkApp

Reviewer 2: It's a string, of max length 255 characters.

The idea was to encode it as the poseidon hash of these characters inside the circuit / in the hash, so that zkApps can unpack it to the string if they want to, but being a single field element makes it lightweight in the transaction snark.

Reviewer: Oh that's cool, okay nvm then!

    | \
    *  *
    |
    *
    |
    *
```

#### Updates in Account Updates

An account update can contain a request to update certain fields in an account.
Those fields are:

- `app_state`
- `delegate`
- `verification_key`
- `permissions`
- `zkapp_uri`
- `token_symbol`
- `timing`
- `voting_for`

Note that some of these items are not in the in the `zkapp` part of an account
(for example, the `delegate` field). A given account update may request to
update some or all of these items.

The `permissions` field of accounts is expanded to include permissions to update
each of these items. Besides requiring permission, the `timing` field of an
account can be set only if the account is currently untimed. The complete set of
permissions is described below.

#### Preconditions in account updates

There are three kinds of preconditions that can be checked before applying an
account update:

- account preconditions
- network preconditions
- a `validWhile` precondition

The account preconditions are:

- `balance` : a range of account balances
- `nonce` : a specific nonce, or a range of nonces
- `receipt_chain_hash` : a specific receipt chain hash
- `delegate` : a specific public key

> - `state` : a specific application state

Reviewer: what is a sequence state?

- `sequence_state` : a specific sequence state
- `proved_state` : a specific proved state
- `is_new` : whether the account is new

An account update can include some or all of these
preconditions. These preconditions are checked against the account
from the previous protocol state. These conditions must be true at the
moment the transaction is included in a block, otherwise the
transaction will fail.

> The network preconditions are:

Reviewer: is there a way to get the staged ledger at a particular prior height? That would be very useful for some voting applications, where you want to use the state of the ledger and who owns what tokens at a particular height.

Author: wow I can't believe we missed that -- however, I don't think it's urgent to get it in before fixing this:

> The initial implementation proposes that network preconditions are to be true at
> the moment the transaction is included in a block, otherwise the transaction
> fails. This failure is known to be a bit frustrating as many of the network
> preconditions change rapidly. In a future hardfork, there will likely be changes
> to allow network preconditions to be true in a range of slots/blocks rather than
> the exact one where the transaction is added.

The staged ledger hash changes every block so it will be effectively unusable initially.

Reviewer: Hard to add, I guess? Yeah I think could be a later thing if so

Author: Not hard to add once the blocking change above is ready, but that one is a bit risky

Reviewer: Gotcha, okay.

verify.

The `access` permission introduced here affects not only zkApps, but
also the payment and delegation transactions in the existing mainnet.
For those transactions, the fee payer and source accounts (which are
always the same accounts, in any case) need to have an `access`
permission compatible with a signature authorization.

### Processing zkApp transactions

#### zkApp Transaction Entrypoints

A user can create a zkApp transaction using SnarkyJS or other tooling, and sign
it with a wallet key. The daemon provides a GraphQL endpoint to accept the
zkApp. If the zkApp has a sufficient fee and passes validity checks (see below),
it's queued to the transaction pool for broadcast to the network.

#### Fees and queueing

The fee payer's account update specifies a transaction fee and a
nonce. The fee payer nonce must agree with the nonce in the fee
payer's ledger account, or the zkApp is not added to the transaction
pool. All signatures and proofs in the zkApp must verify before adding
it to the pool. There is a size heuristic for zkApps: Those zkApps
that are too large according to that heuristic are not accepted into
the pool.

> The size heuristic involves three limits: a limit on the number of

Reviewer: What is the proposal on the setting for the size heuristic?

Author: updated with specifics

zkApp transaction with four account updates is equivalent to two payments. So
essentially with zkApp transactions there can be more accounts to be updated
(or more updates per account) with the same number of transactions per blocks as
mainnet is currently at. The overhead mainly comes from additional steps
involved in updating the scan state which includes witness generation.

#### Block Validation

Block verification will now involve additional zkApp proof verification. The
proofs can be efficiently batch verified since a failing batch means the block
is simply rejected.

#### Snark workers

A ZkApp transaction is essentially a list of updates to accounts. Generating
transaction snark for a zkApp transaction would involve proving each account
update and the recursively merging the proofs. Thus proving time of a zkApp
transaction depends on the number of account updates. Additionally, account
updates with proofs are more expensive than account updates with signatures or
no authorization. Because the transaction application logic circuit will
increase, more memory is required to create transaction proofs. This MIP will

> require Snark Workers utilize more compute and memory than they had before this

Reviewer: how much more? Do we have recommended specs?

Author: updated with specifics

change.

#### Memory impact

In addition to the impact to Snark Workers, all participating nodes in the
network will now need to store larger transactions through different
subsystems. Blocks will be larger because transactions can be larger. The
mempool can be tweaked to store fewer max transactions at a time, but other
components that store blocks must expand in size. This has some effect on

> memory, but initial prototypes confirm node requirements remain reasonable.

Reviewer: what does reasonable look like? Same as before or increased?

Author: updated with specifics

#### Limiting zkApp transaction size

There is a "size heuristic" described earlier in this document to ensure the
number of account updates inside zkApp transactions is limited. There are also
limits on other parts of a transaction: The memo has a fixed size and events
and actions are capped to enforce that the network doesn't need to do too much
work to process a transaction.

> ## Backwards Compatibility

Reviewer: Maybe we should call this requiring a hard fork? Seems to me that existing functionality is kept, and that should qualify for "backwards compatibility" from a user perspective?

Author: The copy in the first paragraph covers this no?

Payments and delegation transactions are unchanged, but the logic to process them and consensus rules are not backward compatible (and thus requires a hardfork)

Reviewer: I think maybe there's two topics going on here worth separating? I think maybe two separate definitions of "backwards compatibility". 

One is that this requires a hard fork as mentioned. This maybe is almost forward compatibility? I haven't thought of it as backwards compatibility, but curious if there's some framing which makes that make sense.

But the other is plans for future hard forks, and particularly - whether prior functionality will be preserved or deprecated? I read this section as more talking about that (with the first paragraph just saying, this requires a hard fork)

Author: reworded

authors: Deepthi Kumar (deepthiskumar), Paul Steckler (@psteckler), Brett Carter (@carterbrett), Brandon Kase (@bkase)
discussions-to:
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2023-02-14
---

## Abstract

This MIP proposes adding programmable smart contracts, called zkApps, to the Mina protocol.

The reference implementation is located on the `develop` branch of the
MinaProtocol/mina repo.

## Motivation

The zkApps protocol aims to add a more fleshed out smart contract layer to Mina
to make it much more convenient and flexible to add custom applications.
These changes extend the potential of zero-knowledge cryptography by enabling
the following characteristics while preserving the succinctness of Mina:

  **General programmability** - able to execute and settle arbitrary programs,
  not constrained to a particular VM model, but instead is flexibly designed to
  support any number of execution models, VM-like or otherwise

  **Programmable privacy** - the privacy of inputs to smart contracts and
  their state can be programmed by their developers

  **Constant in verification time** - individual transactions are executed, or

>   more accurately “proven” asynchronously off-chain and verified on-chain in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  more accurately “proven”, asynchronously off-chain and verified on-chain in
```

  time proportional to the account updates, independent of computational
  complexity of any individual proof inside of each account update

This MIP represents the first iteration of such a protocol.

## Specification

The following description summarizes the planned changes to the protocol. Not
all technical details are described here.

### Ledger account changes

Recall that accounts are identified by a public key and token id pair.

To accommodate zkApps, Mina ledger accounts have the following new field:

- `token_symbol`: a string, up to six characters long, that can provide a name
     for a `token_id` whose owner is the public key and token id in this
     account. In the existing mainnet, only the default MINA `token_id` is

>      used. New `token_id`s are derived from the the addresses of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     used. New `token_id`s are derived from the addresses of the
```

     smart contract that defines them.

The following account field is removed:

- `token_permissions`: this field was meant for non-default tokens that were
never introduced

The `snapp` field in accounts was never instantiated and is
replaced by the `zkapp` field.

The `zkapp` field is a record with the following fields:

- `app_state` : an array of eight field elements, the current state of a zkApp
associated with the account
- `verification_key` : an optional key to use when verifying transaction
SNARKs for zkApps using this account; when not provided, the account is a
typical Mina account that supports payments.
- `zkapp_version` : a nonnegative integer, the zkApps version that determined
the `app_state`

> - `action_state` : an array of five field elements, each representing an
> "action" (see below) contained in a zkApp

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `action_state` : an array of five field elements, each representing an
"action" contained in a zkApp. For details, see [actions](#actions).

```

Reviewer 3: afaik, in-document links work to headings, so I've added the ####Actions heading

- `last_action_slot` : the global slot when the `action_state` was last updated
- `proved_state` : a boolean, whether the application state was set from a
proof-driven zkapp transaction.
- `zkapp_uri` : a string, of max size=255, either empty, or denoting a URI that
contains information about the zkApp

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

#### Actions

```

zkApps documentation on
[events](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/zkapps/advanced-snarkyjs/events) and
[actions](https://docs.minaprotocol.com/zkapps/advanced-snarkyjs/actions-and-reducer)
for more information on the mental model of these primitives and how they're
used in practice.

Initially, the `action_state` contains default values; it's updated at most once
per block. Each time a new element is added, the existing elements are shifted,
and the rightmost element discarded. The max size of the queue is 5.

### zkApp transactions

A zkApp transaction contains an account update for a fee payer, and zero or more
account updates for other accounts (might include the fee payer account).

The fee payer's account update contains:
- a signature
- a public key
- an optional `valid_until` slot and
- a nonce

The other account updates contain more information:

- `authorization` : a proof, a signature, or `None_given`
- `public_key`
- `token_id` : the default MINA token or a custom token
- `update` : a specification of how the account must be updated
- `balance_change` : a signed quantity, how much this account's balance will
change

> - `increment_nonce` : a boolean, whether this account's nonce will increment

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `increment_nonce` : a boolean, whether to increment this account's nonce
```

- `events` : an array of field elements the zkApp can choose to provide

> - `actions` : a list of events the zkApp can choose to provide (see above re
> `sequence_state` for a primer on actions)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `actions` : a list of events the zkApp can choose to provide, see `sequence_state` in [Actions](#Actions) for a primer on actions
```

Reviewer 3: @bkase please verify link is to intended target

- `call_data` : a hash used when composing zkApps
- `call_depth` : a nonnegative integer, used to establish parent/child

> relationships between account updates (see more information on tokens)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
relationships between account updates. For more information on tokens, see [Token Mechanics](#token-mechanics).
```

- `preconditions` : preconditions that must hold for the account update to
succeed
- `use_full_commitment` : whether to include hashes of the fee payer and memo in
the commitment for a signature authorization
- `implicit_account_creation_fee` : a boolean, whether to pay an account
creation fee from the `balance_change`; otherwise, the fee is taken from the
"fee excess" across all account updates

> - `may_use_token` : See below for an explanation of this field's semantics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `may_use_token` : See [Token Mechanics](#token-mechanics) for an explanation of this field's semantics
```

enforce rules about their usages.

`may_use_token` can take one of three values:
* `No` -- only default MINA token can be used
* `Parents_own_token` -- the direct parent account update owns the token
* `Inherit_from_parent` -- copy the direct parent account update's permission

Valid transactions can contain arbitrarily deep trees, though the network can
process only the transactions that have a total size within the constraints of
the "size heuristic" defined later in this document.

This structure is flexible to support all sorts of token interactions that we
see on other blockchains. For example, you can check arbitrary depth subtrees
with recursive proofs and sums up all balances and checks that all the balances
sum to zero in order to allow any token interactions that don't create new
tokens. Using the parenting system, you can also implement complex interactions
like liquidity tokens in a DEX.

Note that this structure enables extremely powerful usages of tokens. The entire
Mina ecosystem benefits with a collective agreement to agree on more restrictive
token standards built on top of these systems such that groups of contracts can

> compose with one-another more easily.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compose with one another more easily.
```

#### Call Forest Encoding

Construct a call forest from a list of account updates, where the
call-depth field of an account update encodes the Node-Left-Right depth-first
traversal order of the update within a tree. A new tree within a forest is
indicated by a call-depth of 0. Each successive account update can
increase by 1, stay the same, or decrease by an arbitrary amount. Call-depth 0
defines a new tree in the forest, and a non-zero number defines a child of the
most recently defined tree.

Here is an example of a forest constructed from a list of account updates with
call-depths `0 0 1 2 3 1 0` :

```
 *  *     *
    | \
    *  *
    |
    *
    |
    *
```

#### Updates in Account Updates

An account update can contain a request to update certain fields in an account.
Those fields are:

- `app_state`
- `delegate`
- `verification_key`
- `permissions`
- `zkapp_uri`
- `token_symbol`
- `timing`
- `voting_for`

> Note that some of these items are not in the in the `zkapp` part of an account

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that some of these items are not in the `zkapp` part of an account
```

from the previous protocol state. These conditions must be true at the
moment the transaction is included in a block, otherwise the
transaction fails.

The network preconditions are:

- `snarked_ledger_hash` : a specific ledger hash
- `blockchain_length` : a range of block heights
- `min_window_density` : a range of window densities
- `total_currency` : a range of amounts
- `global_slot_since_genesis` : a range of slots
- `staking_epoch_data` : epoch data
- `next_epoch_data` : epoch_data

where `epoch_data` contains:

- a specific ledger hash
- a range for total currency
- a specific epoch seed
- start and lock checkpoints
- a range of epoch lengths

Among these network precondition items, any item can be checked or ignored as a
precondition. That also holds for the individual items in `epoch_data`. As for
account preconditions, these items are checked against the previous protocol
state.

The initial implementation proposes that network preconditions are to be true at
the moment the transaction is included in a block, otherwise the transaction
fails. This failure is known to be a bit frustrating as many of the network

> preconditions . In a future hardfork, there will likely be changes to allow

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
preconditions. In a future hardfork, there will likely be changes to allow
```

Reviewer 3: verify the sentence completeness... the failure frustration is ?

maybe r/w as 

>  frustrating as many of the network preconditions are.

the current slot, rather than the slot from the previous protocol state.

### Custom tokens

zkApps allow the creation of custom, non-default tokens. Every token, except the
default MINA token, has an owner that is an account identifier (a public key
and token pair from a ledger account).

To mint a custom token, a zkApp contains an account update for an account that
owns the token to be minted; a child account update specifies that token and the
number of tokens to be minted.

This code, adapted from a Mina unit test, shows the pattern:

```ocaml
let token_minting =
  mk_forest
    [ mk_tree
        (mk_account_update_body Signature No token_owner default_token
           (- account_creation_fee) )
        [ mk_tree
           (mk_account_update_body None_given Parents_own_token
             custom_token_account custom_token 100 )
           []
        ]
    ]
```

`No` and `Parents_own_token` are the token permissions for the parent
and child, respectively.  If these account updates succeed, a new
account is created with a balance of 100 in the custom token.

An account update using a custom token requires permission to use

> that token. In this example, the parent account is the the account id

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that token. In this example, the parent account is the account id
```

Given a permission and a tag, an account update can perform an operation
according to this OCaml function:

```ocaml
let check (t : Auth_required.t) (c : Control.Tag.t) =
  match (t, c) with
  | Impossible, _ ->
      false
  | None, _ ->
      true
  | Proof, Proof ->
      true
  | Signature, Signature ->
      true
  | Either, (Proof | Signature) ->
      true
  | Signature, Proof ->
      false
  | Proof, Signature ->
      false
  | (Proof | Signature | Either), None_given ->
      false
```

The permissions that govern individual field updates are:

- `edit_state`
- `set_delegate`
- `set_permissions`
- `set_verification_key`
- `set_zkapp_uri`
- `edit_sequence_state`
- `set_token_symbol`
- `increment_nonce`
- `set_voting_for`
- `set_timing`

There are permissions for sending and receiving tokens:

- `send`
- `receive`

Finally, there is an `access` permission that allows an account
update to access a ledger account. The `access` permission disallows all
access to a ledger account if the authorization does not check against
the permission, or the proof or signature authorization does not
verify.

The `access` permission introduced here affects not only zkApps, but

> also the payment and delegation transactions in the existing mainnet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
also the payment and delegation transactions in the existing Mainnet.
```

Reviewer 3: do we want to specify existing Mina Mainnet?

I capitalized Mainnet here to adhere to the guidance in the Mina docs style guide https://github.com/o1-labs/docs2/wiki/Docs-Style-Guide

For those transactions, the fee payer and source accounts (that are
always the same accounts, in any case) need to have an `access`
permission compatible with a signature authorization.

### Processing zkApp transactions

#### zkApp Transaction Entrypoints

A user can create a zkApp transaction using SnarkyJS or other tooling, and sign
it with a wallet key. The daemon provides a GraphQL endpoint to accept the

> zkApp. If the zkApp has a sufficient fee and passes validity checks (see below),
> it's queued to the transaction pool for broadcast to the network.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
zkApp. If the zkApp has a sufficient fee and passes validity checks,
it's queued to the [transaction pool](#transaction-pool) for broadcast to the network.
```

An account update is checked in several ways:

- if a custom token is involved, the token permissions are checked
- if the account update is authorized by using a proof, the verification key
   hash in the account update matches that in the ledger account
- proofs and signatures are verified
- the preconditions, including `validWhile` are checked
- the sender's balance change is checked against an account balance
- the balance change is checked against the account timing, if that exists

As soon as a check fails, processing of that account update stops, no
more account updates are processed, and the zkApp fails.

When all account updates have been processed, the sum of their
balance changes, including the fee payer's balance change, must be zero.
Otherwise, the zkApp fails.

Payments and delegations are also processed over two passes, though
the second pass does not change the result from the first pass.
The first-pass processing is identical to what it was in the protocol
before the changes proposed in this document.

Proofs inside of account updates are checked when zkApp transactions are
added to the transaction pool against some known potential future verification

> key (see the "Mitigation of Attack 2: Verification Key Superposition" section
> for more details). When a block is created, the proofs are not re-checked

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
key as described in [Mitigation of Attack 2: Verification Key Superposition](#mitigation-of-attack-2-verification-key-superposition). When a block is created, the proofs are not re-checked
```

#### Transaction Application

If the zkApp succeeds, the balance changes from all the account
updates are applied to the ledger; the nonces are incremented for
those account updates with `implicit_increment_nonce`; updates to
account fields are applied, and `app_state` and `proved_state` are
updated.

As with failing payments, failing zkApps are eligible to be included in
blocks. For a failing zkApp, the only affected account is the fee payer.

### Transaction SNARK

The transaction SNARK has been changed to implement the above zkapp logic in a
Kimchi circuit.

### Impact On Other Protocol Components

#### Snarked Ledger

A snarked ledger corresponds to the ledger state after all transactions in a
scan-state tree are fully snarked. For example, after the sequence of
transactions are recursively proven. As the chain progresses and transactions
are snarked, there is a new snarked ledger everytime a sequence of transactions
is fully snarked and this state is updated in the protocol state. With the two-
pass application model there are two ledger states that correspond to a scan
state tree-first pass ledger and second pass ledger. When there are transactions

> from a block overflowing to a new scan state tree (as shown below), the second

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from a block overflowing to a new scan state tree as shown in the following diagram, the second
```

Reviewer 3: oof I'm not sure "diagram" is the right word here, we can r/w for clarity

pass ledger of the first tree is assumed to be true provided ledger state after
applying the remainder of the block's transaction in the second tree are true.
Due to this impending assumption that is validated only in the SNARK proof of
the second tree, first pass ledger is deemed as fully snarked and used as the
snarked ledger everywhere else in the protocol.

Having first-pass ledger as snarked ledger means that a snarked ledger can

> correspond to a set of transactions that aren't fully applied and/or it may

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
correspond to a set of transactions that aren't fully applied and/or it can
```

include transactions that were applied partially (first-pass) in the previous
snarked ledger and fully applied (first-pass and second-pass) in the current
one.

For example, say, transactions `T1`s from a block split across two scan-state
trees. `T10` and `T11` from the first tree are applied partially (first pass) to
`Tree1`'s snarked ledger. The snarked ledger for `Tree2` extend `Tree1`'s
snarked ledger by applying first pass of `T12`, `T13` and then second pass of
`T10`, `T11`, `T12`, and `T13`.

            Tree1                  Tree2

             M4                      M5
       M0          M1           M2        M3
    T00   T01  T10   T11    T12   T13  T20   T21

#### Epoch Ledgers

Snarked ledgers are used as epoch ledgers or staking ledgers for vrf
evaluations. These now are first-pass ledgers as described

> [above](#snarked-ledger).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 in [Snarked Ledger](#snarked-ledger).
```

updates with proofs are more expensive than account updates with signatures or
no authorization. Because the transaction application logic circuit will
increase, more memory is required to create transaction proofs. This MIP
requires that Snark Workers utilize more compute and memory than they had before
this change.

#### Memory impact

In addition to the impact to Snark Workers, all participating nodes in the
network must now store larger transactions through different
subsystems. Blocks will be larger because transactions can be larger. The
mempool can be tweaked to store fewer max transactions at a time, but other
components that store blocks must expand in size. This has some effect on
memory, but initial prototypes confirm node requirements remain reasonable.

#### Limiting zkApp transaction size

There is a "size heuristic" described earlier in this document to ensure the
number of account updates inside zkApp transactions is limited. There are also
limits on other parts of a transaction: The memo has a fixed size and events
and actions are capped to enforce that the network doesn't need to do too much
work to process a transaction.

> ## Backwards Compatibility

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Backward Compatibility
```

> This MIP is not backwards-compatible; it is an extensive change to the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This MIP is not backward compatible; it is an extensive change to the
```

Reviewer 3: I rely on [Google developer documentation style guide](https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#letter-b), where I looked up this term

consensus rules and requires a hard fork to implement. Nonetheless,
processing of payments and delegations has not changed.

> Backwards compatibility for zkApps is an important consideration for future

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Backward compatibility for zkApps is an important consideration for future
```

susceptible to denial of service attacks. This section outlines two such DoS
vulnerabilities that came up design of zkApps and how these attack vectors that
were revealed during design were mitigated.

#### Attack 1: Fee hijacking

Consider a hypothetical zkApps implementation where fees and account updates
are applied in their entirety before moving on to the next transaction.

In this world, consider the following scenario:

* Account A has a balance of 10 MINA tokens
* Account A has granted a smart contract access to drain his funds
* Account A sends a transaction, `T1`, with a high fee, 5 MINA, such that it
will likely be included in the next or soon to be upcoming block
* This transaction is accepted in the mempool because Account A has access to
these funds
* Another Account B triggers the smart contract call in another transaction,
`T2`, that drains Account A
* `T2` is sent with a higher fee such that it will be selected first by block
producers
* `T2` is chosen before `T1`, but then `T1` does not have the funds to pay for
the fee!

Such processes can be repeated to completely fill the mempool with "broken"

> transacitons such that honest transactions cannot be processed; the economic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transactions such that honest transactions cannot be processed; the economic
```

incentives for filling the mempool are bypassed.

#### Mitigation of Attack 1: Two-phase Transaction Application

The following mitigation sufficiently protects against fee hijacking attacks by
ensuring that for all potential transaction mempool states, the fee portion of
every transaction in the mempool can always be applied in the next block under
any circumstance.

How? Introduce two-phase transaction application (as described in earlier

> sections). zkApp transactions are applied in the folowing manner: First fees are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
sections). zkApp transactions are applied in the following manner: First, fees are
```

look at the fee-payment part of a transaction when keeping a sorted queue of
transactions to-be-selected for a block. It also ensures that no other
components need to consider smart sequencing mechanisms.

Alternative mitigations include adding sophisticated sequencing requirements to
honest mempools or block producers, but this comes with other complexities, so
the two-phase application was chosen.

#### Attack 2: Verification key denial of service

Consider a hypothetical zkApps implementation where transaction mempools
consider transactions valid under a _current verification key_ model; ie. the
current verification key in the ledger is used as a source of truth when
considering the validity of subsequent zkApp transactions.

In this world, consider the following scenario:

1. A zkApp transaction that deploys a zkApp (with verification key `vk0` is
accepted to the mempool)
2. All new incoming transactions are verified against `vk0` in the ledger (from
step1)
3. A transaction that updates the verification key to `vk1` is enqueued,
followed by many zkapp transactions with proofs verifying against `vk0`. These

> transactions will be invalid after the the verification key is updated to `vk1`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
transactions will be invalid after the verification key is updated to `vk1`
```

update's verification key hash matches the key in the account when the update is
applied, setting the status as failed if they do not match.
* In the transaction snark, again compare the account update's verification key
hash against the ledger and if they don’t match, do not require proofs to
validate in the snark (the snark succeeds)
* When validating blocks, proofs in blocks are split based on transaction
statuses: all transactions that failed for invalid proofs are batched vertically
(within each command), and all other transactions are batched horizontally (one
batch for all commands).

Note that it does not suffice to consider only the _latest_ verification key
pending in the mempool when checking if a transaction is valid because it is
impossible to know when a smart contract will deploy.

## Testing

### zkApps Protocol Testing

The changes described in this document are extensive, and require thorough
testing.

Test transaction application for zkApp transactions performing all possible
account updates, with and without permission for each update. Unless the fee
payer permission is invalid, all transactions whether or not are permitted to

> make an update should be included in a block. This is to prevent transaction

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
payer permission is invalid, all transactions whether permitted to
make an update or not, are included in a block. This is to prevent transaction
```

Reviewer 3: should is ambiguous, testing includes the block, right?

Reviewer 3: the sentence reads weird... and maybe the sentence before also needs r/w to clarify what is being prevented

| Bootstrap: Restart a node after 2*k blocks to trigger full bootstrap|
| Genesis ledger: zkApp accounts in genesis ledger|

These cases can be covered in unit tests or integration tests defaulting to unit
tests when applicable since the unit tests run relatively quickly and are meant
to test specific features. The integration tests take more time, and test
combined features of the protocol.

### zkApps Composite Logic Testing

Besides testing the zkApp features of the protocol in isolation, we can increase
our confidence in the correctness of those features by constructing applications
that combine such features. As an example of such a feature, the SnarkyJS
toolkit lets us specify reducers that correspond to "actions" in the protocol, 
that can be included in an application.

Since SnarkyJS includes a LocalBlockchain runtime which contains the full
zkApps implementation compiled to JavaScript, this was used as a target backend.

Goals of this effort were to define the minimal scope of realistic
applications that exercised all parts of the zkApps logic such that:

1. With very high confidence, it is believed that funds won't be at risk from

> any bugs (see application 2 for complex token interactions that stress test
> this).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
any bugs. See [Application 2: DEX](#application-2-dex) for complex token interactions that stress test this.
```

2. With medium confidence, we believe that all features work as expected.

It suffices to create two realistic applications to cover the surface area of
features within zkApps.

### Application 1: Timed Voting

We constructed an app that allows voters to choose candidates within a
certain time period. The app supports more than eight candidates as to

> warrant the use of off-chain merkle tree. It also uses another app that keeps

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
warrant the use of off-chain Merkle trees. It also uses another app that keeps
```

track of voters, number of votes per voter, and whether or not they are
qualified to vote.

Additional requirements:

* An election commission can deploy the voting zkapp and makes the candidate
list public in the form of events
* Voters can generate transactions that specify who/what they want to vote for
* The election commission ensures that the zkapp records the votes from accepted
transactions and stores in its state
* The election commission can use the zkapp to generate transactions that
commits to the latest vote count (what it has recorded so far)

> * After the voting window closes, the election commision can commit to the final

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* After the voting window closes, the election commission can commit to the final
```

vote count.
* The "count votes" method can be called at any moment

Components of the zkCPU tested:

* Smart contract composition
* Actions/Reducers + edge cases
* Account + Network Preconditions
* Live upgrading of contract mid-transaction
* Permissions

> * State overflows (use merkle trees)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* State overflows (use Merkle trees)
```
